(1) LAB EXERCISE: Write a simple "Hello World" program in two different programming languages of
your choice. Compare the structure and syntax

ans:- in (C): #include <stdio.h>
               int main (){
                printe ("hello world");
                return 0;
               }
       
      in (python): printe ("hello world")


[:- in c Requires a main() function but in python not requires main function.
 :- in c Includes header files (eg #include <stdio.h>) but in python not requires header files.]


[:- in c Uses semicolons (;) to end statements but in python not youse semicolon.
 :- in c Uses braces {} to define blocks but in python not youse braces to define block.] 
 

(2) THEORY EXERCISE: Explain in your own words what a program is and how it functions.
What is Programming?

ans:- what is program :- A program is a set of step-by-step instructions that tells a computer what to do 
                         eg:- recipe tells a cook how to prepare a meal,a program tells a computer how to perform a task
      how it function :- A program generally works in this sequence like Input,Processing,output
     
      What Is Programming :- Programming is the process of designing, writing, testing, and maintaining programs


(3) THEORY EXERCISE: What are the key steps involved in the programming process?
Types of Programming Languages

ans:- here are the steps (1)planning,(2)analysis,(3)design,(4)implementation,(5)testing,(6)maintenance
      types of programing languages :- c,c++,python,java


(4) THEORY EXERCISE: What are the main differences between high-level and low-level
programminglanguages?

ans:- high-level languages :- designed to easy for read, write, and understand 
                              Use simple syntax
                              eg:- Python, Java, C++
      low- level languages :- hard to  understend 
                              eg:- machine language

(5) LAB EXERCISE: Research and create a diagram of how data is transmitted from a client to a server
over the internet.







(6) THEORY EXERCISE: Describe the roles of the client and server in web communication.
Network Layers on Client and Server

ans:- role of the client :- A client is a device or application that requests services or resources from a server
                            eg:- A web browser like Google Chrome, A mobile app, A desktop application

      role of the server :- A server is a powerful computer or system that provides services or resources to clients
                            eg :- Web servers, Application servers, Database servers 
      
     Network layers :- Both client and server follow network layers to ensure proper communication. 
                       The most common models are: osi model , tcp/ip model



(7) LAB EXERCISE: Design a simple HTTP client-server communication in any language.

ANS :- 








(8) THEORY EXERCISE: Explain the function of the TCP/IP model and its layers.

ans :- function = Standardizes network communication
                  Provides reliable and scalable data transmission
                  Handles addressing, routing, transmission

       layers = The TCP/IP model has four layers
                1 Application Layer
                2 Transport Layer
                3 Internet Layer 
                4 Network Access Layer


(9) THEORY EXERCISE: Explain Client Server Communication

ans :- Client–Server communication is a way computers talk to each other over a network
        Client → The computer or app that requests something
        Server → The computer that provides the service or data


(10) LAB EXERCISE: Research different types of internet connections (e.g., broadband, fiber,
satellite)and list their pros and cons


ans :- broadband = Broadband is a high-speed internet connection
                    pros = Affordable, Widely available, Good for home use
                    cons = Speed can slow down during peak hours, Not as fast as fiber 
       
       fiber = Fiber internet uses light signals through fiber-optic cables
                pros = Very high speed ,Very reliable, Good for streaming, gaming
                cons = Not available everywhere, Can be expensive
                 
       satellite = Satellite internet uses signals sent to and from satellites in space
                 pros = Available in rural and remote areas, Does not need cables or phone lines
                 cons = Slower than fiber, Can be expensive

(11) THEORY EXERCISE: How does broadband differ from fiber-optic internet

ans :- Broadband is a general term for high-speed internet
       Fiber-optic internet is a specific type of broadband that uses fiber cables

       Broadband = Uses telephone lines, Sends data using electrical signals
       Fiber-Optic = Uses fiber-optic cables, Sends data using light signals

(12) LAB EXERCISE: Simulate HTTP and FTP requests using command line tools (e.g., curl)

ans :- curl is a command-line tool used to send requests to servers using different protocols such as HTTP and FTP
       HTTP = curl http://example.com

       FTP = curl ftp://ftp.example.com/file.txt -o file.txt


(13) THEORY EXERCISE: What are the differences between HTTP and HTTPS protocols?

ans :- HTTP = Fast
              Easy to use
              No encryption

      HTTPS = Data is encrypted
              Secure for login, banking, shopping
              Protects user privacy

(14) LAB EXERCISE: Identify and explain three common application security vulnerabilities.
Suggestpossible solutions.

ANS :- SQL Injection = Attackers insert SQL code into input fields to access or modify the database.
       Possible Solutions: Use prepared statements
                           Limit database permissions for the application

       Insecure Authentication = Applications allow weak passwords or fail to protect login credentials properly
                                Example: Allowing 12345 as a password or storing passwords in plain text
       Possible Solutions: Enforce strong password policies
                           Implement multi-factor authentication


(15) THEORY EXERCISE: What is the role of encryption in securing applications?

ans :- Encryption is the process of converting data into a secret code so that only authorized users can read it
       In applications, encryption protects data both when it’s stored and when it’s transmitted over networks


(16) LAB EXERCISE: Identify and classify 5 applications you use daily as either system software
orapplication software 

ans :- 1 Windows
       2 Google Chrome 
       3 Microsoft Word 
       4 Antivirus
       5 YouTube

(17) THEORY EXERCISE: What is the difference between system software and application software?

ans :- system software = Runs and controls the computer
                         Operating Systems (Windows, macOS, Linux)
                         Needed to run application software
                        
       application software = Performs user-oriented tasks
                              Browsers, Games, Spotify
                              Runs on top of system software


(18) LAB EXERCISE: Design a basic three-tiersoftware architecture diagram for a web application.  

ans :- Presentation Layer      
       application layer
       data layer 

(19) THEORY EXERCISE: Whatis the significance of modularity in software architecture?
 
ans :- Modularity in software architecture is extremely important because it makes a system easier to build, understand, and maintain
       1=Improved Maintainability 
       2=Reusability
       3=Scalability
       4=Enhanced Understandability

(20) LAB EXERCISE: Create a case study on the functionality of the presentation, business logic, and
dataaccess layers of a given software system

ans :- Presentation = This is what the user interacts with directly
                      Provides forms, buttons, and web pages to display information.

          eg = Users click “Add to Cart” or “Buy Now”.

      Business Logic = Handles the rules and decisions of the system.
                       Processes requests from the presentation layer and interacts with the data layer.

         eg = Calculate the total price with discounts

(30) THEORY EXERCISE: Why are layers important in software architecture?

ans :- Layers in software architecture are crucial because they organize a system into distinct, manageable parts, each with a clear responsibility.
       they are yous for Reusability
                         Maintainability
                         Scalability
                         Flexibility

(31)THEORY EXERCISE: Explain the importance of a development environment in software production

ans :- evelopment environment is the combination of tools, software, hardware, and
       configurations that developers use to build, test, and maintain software.

       It plays a critical role in software production because it directly affects productivity, quality, and reliability.

(32) THEORY EXERCISE: What is the difference between source code and machine code?

ans :-  source code :- Source code is the human-readable form of a program written by a programmer using a programming language
                       like :- 1= python
                               2= java
                               3= c++
        machine code :- Machine code is the low-level code that a computer’s processor (CPU) can directly understand and execute.
                        eg = Written in binary 
                             Not human-readable
                             
(33) THEORY EXERCISE: Why is version control important in software development?

ans :- Version control is important in software development because it helps developers manage changes to their code.

       First, it keeps a record of all changes made to a project. If someone makes a mistake, the team can go back to an earlier version and fix it easily.
       Second, it allows many developers to work on the same project at the same time without overwriting each other’s work.
       Third, it prevents loss of work. If a computer crashes or a file is deleted, the code can be recovered

(34) THEORY EXERCISE: What are the benefits of using Github forstudents?

ans :- GitHub is a platform that helps people store and manage their code using Git. For students, it has many important benefits.

       1. Stores Your Work Safely:- GitHub keeps your projects online, so you won’t lose your work if your computer crashes.
       2. Shows Your Skills :- Students can use GitHub as a portfolio. Employers and lecturers can see your projects, code, and progress.
       3. Helps You Practice Version Control :- Track changes, Fix mistakes     
       4. Access to Open-Source Projects :- Students can explore and contribute to real-world projects, which helps improve their coding skills. 

(35) THEORY EXERCISE: What are the differences between open-source and proprietary software?

ans :- 1. Open-Source Software :-Open-source software is software where the source code is publicly available.
                     Anyone can: View the code
                                 Modify it
                                 Share it
                       Example: Linux
       
       2. Proprietary Software :- Proprietary software is software that is owned by a company or individual. The source code is not shared with the public.
                       Example: Microsoft Windows 

(36) THEORY EXERCISE: How does GIT improve collaboration in a software development team?

ans :- Git is a version control system that helps software development teams work together efficiently.
 
       1. Allows Multiple People to Work at the Same Time :- With Git, each team member can work on their own copy of the project. 
                                                             This means developers can work on different features without interfering with each other.     
     
       2. Keeps Track of Changes :-Who made changes, What changes were made

       3. Makes Merging Easy :- When team members finish their work, Git allows them to merge their changes into the main project.

(37) THEORY EXERCISE: What is the role of application software in businesses?

ans :- Application software refers to programs designed to help users perform specific tasks.
       In businesses, application software plays a very important role in improving efficiency and productivity.

       1. Helps Manage Business Operations :- Businesses use application software to manage daily activities 
                                    such as:- Accounting, Inventory, Sales
       2. Improves Communication :- Application software helps employees communicate through:
                                   [Emails, Messaging systems, Video conferencing]

(38) THEORY EXERCISE: What are the main stages of the software development process?

ans :- The software development process is a series of steps followed to create a software system. These steps are often called the Software Development Life Cycle.
       1. Planning
       2. Requirements Analysis
       3. Design
       4. coding 
       5. Testing
       6. Deployment

(39) THEORY EXERCISE: Why is the requirement analysis phase critical in software development?

ans :- The requirement analysis phase is critical in software development because it determines what the software 
       should do and ensures the project meets the users’ needs. Mistakes in this phase can cause major problems later.

      1. Identifies User Needs
      2. Prevents Costly Errors
      3. Guides Design and Development
      4. Improves Software Quality

(40) THEORY EXERCISE: What is the role of software analysis in the development process?

ans :- Software analysis is the stage in development where the project is studied to understand what the software should do
     
       Understand user needs – identifies problems and requirements
       Define requirements clearly – decides what features and functions are needed
       Prevent mistakes – detects issues early, saving time and cost

(41) THEORY EXERCISE: What are the key elements of system design?

ANS :- System design is about architecting scalable, reliable,
       and maintainable systems that meet functional and non-functional requirements.
      
       1. Requirements Analysis: What the system must do, Features, workflows, business logic
       2. High-Level Architecture: Client-server architecture Layered architecture
       3. Data Design : SQL, non sql

(42) THEORY EXERCISE: Why is software testing important?

ans :- Software testing is important because it makes sure the software works correctly,
       safely, and reliably before users use it.

       Finds Bugs :- Testing helps detect errors before customers see them.
       Improves Quality :- Works as expected, Meets requirements, Performs well
       Increases Security :- Cause system crashes, Lose customers, Damage brand trust
       Builds Customer Confidence :-When software runs smoothly, users trust it.

(43) THEORY EXERCISE: What types of software maintenance are there?

ans :- Corrective Maintenance :- Fixing errors or bugs after the software is released

       Adaptive Maintenance :- Updating the software to work in a new environment.

       Perfective Maintenance :- Improving the software based on user feedback.

       Preventive Maintenance :- Making changes to prevent future problems.

(44) THEORY EXERCISE: What are the key differences between web and desktop applications?

ans :- Web Application :- No installation needed
                          Usually requires internet
                          Accessible from any device with a browser
                          Updated automatically on server
                          Depends on internet speed
 
      Desktop Application :- Must be installed on computer
                             Can work offline
                             Usually tied to one device
                             User must update manually
                             Usually faster

(45) THEORY EXERCISE: What are the advantages of using web applications over desktop applications?

ans :- Access from Anywhere :- Web apps can be used from any device with internet and a browser

       No Installation Required :-Users don’t need to install anything.

       Automatic Updates :-Updates happen on the server.

       Lower Cost :-No installation cost, No maintenance on each user’s device

       Cross-Platform Compatibility :- Windows, mac 

(46) THEORY EXERCISE: What role does UI/UX design play in application development?

ans :- UI/UX design plays a very important role because it focuses on how the application looks, feels, and works

      (1) =  UI – How It Looks :- Colors
                                  buttons
                                  Layout
                                  Fonts
                                  Visual design
  
      (2) UX – How It Feels :- Ease of use
                               Navigation
                               User satisfaction
                               Smooth interaction

(47) THEORY EXERCISE: What are the differences between native and hybrid mobile apps?

ans :-  Native App = Built for one platform
                     Platform-specific
                     Very fast and smooth
                     Full access
                     Higher cost
  
        Hybrid App = Built once, works on multiple platforms
                     Web technologies
                     Slightly slower than native
                     Limited or uses plugins
                     Lower cost

(48) THEORY EXERCISE: What is the significance of DFDs in system analysis?

ans :- DFD shows how data moves through a system
 
       Visual Representation of the System :- Makes it easy to understand the flow of data.
       Helps Identify System Requirements :- Analysts can see what the system needs to do
       Detects Errors :- Shows redundant or missing processes 
       Communication Tool :- Bridges the gap between developers, users, and stakeholders.

(49) THEORY EXERCISE: What are the pros and cons of desktop applications compared to web applications?
 
ans :- Desktop Applications :-
       Pros:- Better Performance – Runs locally, faster and smoother.
              Works Offline – Doesn’t need internet to function.
              Full Access to System Resources – Can use hardware like GPU

       Cons:-Platform-Specific – Needs separate versions for Windows, Mac, etc.
             Installation Required – Users must download and install.
             Manual Updates – Users need to update apps themselves.
      
       Web Applications :- 
       pros:- Accessible Anywhere – Works on any device with a browser.
              No Installation Needed – Just open a browser and start.
              Automatic Updates – Always uses the latest version

       cons:- Dependent on Internet – May not work offline.
              Slower Performance – Depends on browser and internet speed.
              Limited Access to Device Hardware – Harder to fully utilize system resources.

(50) :- THEORY EXERCISE: How do flowcharts help in programming and system design?

ans :- A flowchart is a diagram that represents the step-by-step flow of a process or program using 
       symbols like arrows, ovals, rectangles, and diamonds.
 
       Visualize the Process - Shows the sequence of steps clearly.
       Plan Before Coding - Helps programmers design the algorithm first 
       Identify Problems Early - Reveals logical errors, missing steps, or redundant processes before implementation.
       Documentation & Maintenance - Acts as a reference for future updates or maintenance
       




       






















              


























              


























































      